National curriculum tests

Key stage 2
English reading test framework
National curriculum tests from 2016
For test developers

© Crown copyright 2015
2016 key stage 2 English reading test framework: national curriculum tests from 2016
Electronic version product code: STA/15/7341/e ISBN: 978-1-78315-826-3
You may re-use this document / publication (not including logos) free of charge
in any format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0.
To view this licence, visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
version/3 or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information, you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This document is available for download on the GOV.UK website at www.gov.uk/sta.

Key stage 2 English reading test framework 3

Contents
1. Overview
1.1 Purposes of statutory assessment

4
4

2. What is a test framework?

5

3. Nature of the test
3.1 Population to be assessed
3.2 Test format

6
6
6

4. Content domain

7

5. Cognitive domain
5.1 Descriptions of each strand of the cognitive domain

8
8

6. Test specification
6.1 Summary
6.2 Breadth and emphasis
6.3 Format of questions and responses
6.4 Marking and mark schemes
6.5 Reporting
6.6 Desired psychometric properties
6.7 Performance descriptor

11
11
11
13
14
15
15
16

7. Diversity and inclusion
7.1 Access arrangements
7.2 Pupils with English as an additional language (EAL)

18
19
19

Appendix: Glossary of terminology used in the test framework

20

References

21

4 Key stage 2 English reading test framework

1. Overview
This test framework is based on the national curriculum programme of study (2014) for
English, introduced for teaching in schools from September 2014 and first assessed in the
summer term 2016. The framework specifies the purpose, format, content and cognitive
domains of the key stage 2 English reading tests; it is not designed to be used to guide
teaching and learning or to inform statutory teacher assessment.
This document has been produced to aid the test development process.

1.1 Purposes of statutory assessment
The main purpose of statutory assessment is to ascertain what pupils have achieved in
relation to the attainment targets outlined in the national curriculum (2014) in English
reading.
The main intended uses of the outcomes as set out in the Bew Report and the
Government’s consultation document on primary assessment and accountability are to:

• hold schools accountable for the attainment and progress made by their pupils
• inform parents and secondary schools about the performance of individual pupils
• enable benchmarking between schools, as well as monitoring performance locally
and nationally

Key stage 2 English reading test framework 5

2. What is a test framework?
The purpose of the test framework is to provide the documentation to guide the
development of the tests. The framework is written primarily for those who write test
materials and to guide subsequent development and test construction. It is being made
available to a wider audience for reasons of openness and transparency.
Some elements of the statutory national curriculum are not possible to assess using the
current form of testing; they will need to be assessed by teachers as part of their statutory
assessment of the complete national curriculum.
The framework includes those parts of the programme of study as outlined in the national
curriculum (2014) that will be covered in the test (the content domain). The cognitive
processes associated with the measurement of English reading are also detailed in the
cognitive domain.
The test framework also includes a test specification from which valid, reliable and
comparable tests will be constructed each year. This includes specifics about test format,
question types, response types, marking and a clear test-level reporting strategy.
By providing all of this information in a single document, the test framework answers
questions about what the test will cover, and how, in a clear and concise manner.
The framework does not provide information on how teachers should teach the
national curriculum.
The test development process used by the Standards and Testing Agency (STA) embeds
within it the generation of validity and reliability evidence through expert review and
trialling. Given the nature of the evidence collected, it is not anticipated that any additional
studies will be required in order to demonstrate that the tests are fit for purpose. The test
framework does not provide detail of the validity and reliability of individual tests; this will
be provided in the test handbook, which will be published on the DfE’s website following
the administration of the test.
The test framework should be used in conjunction with the national curriculum (2014) and
the annual ‘Assessment and reporting arrangements’ (ARA) document.

6 Key stage 2 English reading test framework

3. Nature of the test
The key stage 2 English reading test forms part of the statutory assessment arrangements
for pupils at the end of key stage 2.
The test is based on the relevant sections of the national curriculum statutory programme
of study (2014) for English reading at key stage 2.
The test will cover the aspects of the curriculum that lend themselves to paper-based,
externally marked testing.

3.1 Population to be assessed
All eligible pupils who are registered at maintained schools, special schools, or academies
(including free schools) in England and are at the end of key stage 2 will be required to take
the key stage 2 English reading test, unless they have taken it in the past.
Some pupils are exempt from the tests. Further details are in the ARA, which can be found
on the GOV.UK website at www.gov.uk/sta.

3.2 Test format
The key stage 2 English reading test comprises a single component. The test is administered
on paper and the total testing time is 60 minutes. The testing time includes time for reading
and responding to questions; there will not be separate reading time.
Table 1: Format of the test
Component

Description

Paper 1:
English reading test

reading booklet and
separate answer
booklet

Number
of papers

Number
of marks

1

50

60 minutes
(including
reading time)

1

50

60 minutes

Timing of paper

(a selection of texts,
1500–2300 words)
Total

Key stage 2 English reading test framework 7

4. Content domain
The content domain sets out the relevant elements from the national curriculum
programme of study (2014) for English at key stage 2 that are assessed in the English
reading test. The tests will, over time, sample from each area of the content domain.
The key stage 2 English reading tests will focus on the comprehension elements of the
national curriculum.
Table 2 shows the content domain, which sets out how elements of the curriculum will be
defined for test development purposes.
Table 2: Content domain relating to questions
Content domain reference
2a

give / explain the meaning of words in context

2b

retrieve and record information / identify key details from fiction and
non-fiction

2c

summarise main ideas from more than one paragraph

2d

make inferences from the text / explain and justify inferences with
evidence from the text

2e

predict what might happen from details stated and implied

2f

identify / explain how information / narrative content is related and
contributes to meaning as a whole

2g

identify / explain how meaning is enhanced through choice of words
and phrases

2h

make comparisons within the text

8 Key stage 2 English reading test framework

5. Cognitive domain
The cognitive domain seeks to make the thinking skills and intellectual processes required
for the key stage 2 English reading test explicit. Each question will be rated against the five
strands of the cognitive domain listed in the tables below to provide an indication of the
cognitive demand. Information on how the questions are rated is shown in section 5.1.
The cognitive domain will be used during test development to ensure comparability of
demand as well as difficulty for tests of successive years.
STA considers that the text brings another dimension to the cognitive scale and is an
essential feature of test and question demand.

5.1 Descriptions of each strand of the cognitive
domain
In the following tables, descriptors are provided for the top and bottom of the rating scale.
Judgement is then used to categorise questions appropriately on the rest of the scale. The
cognitive scale presented in this framework assumes age-appropriate texts and is a standalone scale for national curriculum assessments at the end of key stage 2.
Each of the strands below must be considered in the context of the national curriculum for
English reading at key stage 2.

5.1.1 Accessibility of the target information
This strand relates to the accessibility of the target information that is needed to answer
the question. This means:

• the number and proximity of features that need to be located in the text
• the extent to which the location of the information within the text is identified in
the question
• the extent to which competing information in the text and / or distractors may
mistakenly be selected

It can be thought of as, ‘Where can the information be found?’

Key stage 2 English reading test framework 9

Table 3: Strand A - Accessibility of the target information
A1 (Low)

A2

A3

The information that needs to be
located is basic, highly prominent and
limited to one or two pieces. It is clearly
located by question wording and
limited to a short section of the text.
Competing information is limited.

A4 (High)
The target information is not strongly
located by the question. It is not
prominent within the text, and not
limited to one or two pieces. There is
significant competing information,
either within the text or in the form of
functional distractors.

5.1.2 Complexity of the target information
This strand relates to the complexity of the target information that is needed to answer the
question. This means:

• the lexico-grammatical density of the stimulus
• the level of concreteness / abstractness of the target information
• the level of familiarity of the information needed to answer the question
It can be thought of as, ‘What is the language of the text like?’
Table 4: Strand B - Complexity of the target information
B1 (Low)

B2

B3

Target information has a low level
of abstractness and lexico-grammatical
density, is largely familiar to pupils
and is easily cued by the wording of
the task.

B4 (High)
Target information has a high level of
abstractness and lexico-grammatical
density and a low level of familiarity.
There is a low level of semantic match
between task wording and relevant
information in the text.

5.1.3 Task-specific complexity
This strand relates to task-specific complexity. This means:

• the degree of cognitive complexity involved in answering the question, from
retrieval through to inference and higher-level skills.

It can be thought of as, ‘How much work is needed to answer the question?’
Table 5: Strand C - Task-specific complexity
C1 (Low)
Requires only simple retrieval, with
little or no inference and has concrete
task requirements.

C2

C3

C4 (High)
There are complex inference and
abstract task requirements.

10 Key stage 2 English reading test framework

5.1.4 Response strategy
This strand relates to response strategy. This means:

• the complexity of the written response required
• the extent to which pupils need to organise / structure their response
It can be thought of as, ‘How easy is it to organise and present the answer?’
Table 6: Strand D - Response strategy
D1 (Low)

D2

D3

Answers will be limited to a few words
and will require little organisation. The
structure of response required will
be clearly indicated in the question or
answer booklet.

D4 (High)
Answers are extended, and require
pupils to fully structure and organise
their own responses.

5.1.5 Technical knowledge required
This strand relates to the technical knowledge required. This means:

• the extent of knowledge of vocabulary required by the question
• the subject-specific technical language and knowledge required that is not given
in text

It can be thought of as, ‘How complex is the language of the question and / or the
knowledge needed to answer it?’
Table 7: Strand E - Technical knowledge required
E1 (Low)
No complex word meanings or subjectspecific technical language is required.

E2

E3

E4 (High)
Knowledge of complex word meanings
and subject-specific technical language
is required.

Key stage 2 English reading test framework 11

6. Test specification
This section provides details of each test component.

6.1 Summary
The test comprises one component, which will be presented to pupils as a reading booklet
and an answer booklet.
Table 8: Format of the test
Component

Description

English reading test:
booklet 1

reading booklet and
separate answer
booklet

Number
of papers

Number
of marks

Timing of
component

1

50

60 minutes
(includes
reading time)

1

50

60 minutes

(a selection of texts,
1500–2300 words)
Total

6.2 Breadth and emphasis
The content and cognitive domains for the English reading tests are specified in sections
4 and 5. The test will sample from the content domain in any given year. Although every
element may not be included within each test, the full range of content detailed in this
document will be assessed over time. Consolidation of the key stage 1 material is assumed
within the key stage 2 programme of study and therefore material from key stage 1 may
appear within the key stage 2 test. The questions are placed in order of difficulty, where
possible, while maintaining chronology with the text.
The following sections show the proportion of marks attributed to each of the areas of the
content and cognitive domains in a test.

6.2.1 Range of texts
A range of texts will be included in the tests, including fiction, non-fiction and poetry.
Texts will be appropriate in terms of content and difficulty for pupils aged 11. This will
include texts that are age-appropriate (themes in narratives will be familiar and non-fiction
texts will be suitable for 10–11 year olds) and that require comprehension skills. The texts
will be ordered by increasing reading demand within the reading booklet.

12 Key stage 2 English reading test framework

6.2.2 Profile of content domain
The national curriculum coverage within the test is specified in the content domain in
section 4. The proportion of marks assessing each area of the content domain is shown
in Table 9.
Table 9: Profile of marks by content area
National curriculum reference

Number of marks

Percentage of total mark

2a give / explain the meaning
of words in context

5–10

10–20%

2b retrieve and record
information / identify key
details from fiction and
non-fiction

8–25

16–50%

2c summarise main ideas from
more than one paragraph

1–6

2–12%

2d make inferences from
the text / explain and justify
inferences with evidence from
the text

8–25

16–50%

2e predict what might happen
from details stated and implied

0–3

0–6%

2f identify / explain how
information / narrative content
is related and contributes to
meaning as a whole

0–3

0–6%

2g identify / explain how
meaning is enhanced through
choice of words and phrases

0–3

0–6%

2h make comparisons within
the text

0–3

0–6%

Key stage 2 English reading test framework 13

6.2.3 Profile of cognitive domain
The cognitive domain is specified in section 5. Taking into account the target information
and the task itself, each question will be rated in terms of demand against each of the five
strands of the cognitive domain.
For the cognitive strands A, B and C there will be questions across the range of demand
1 to 4, predominantly at 2 to 4.
For strand D, the range of questions across the cognitive domain will be in the following
approximate proportions.
Table 10: Profile of ratios for strand D
Strand

Percentage of the total mark

D1

20–40%

D2 and D3

40–70%

D4

6–24%

For strand E, the majority of questions will be at E1 and E2.

6.3 Format of questions and responses
Table 11 shows how marks will be distributed across different mark tariffs.
Table 11: Profile of mark tariffs
Mark tariffs

Range of marks at mark tariff

1 mark questions

22–33 marks

2 mark questions

10–20 marks (5–10 questions)

3 mark questions

3–12 marks (1–4 questions)

The question types in the test will be distributed across the selected and constructed
response questions in the proportions shown in the table. The range of question types are
exemplified by, but not limited to, those listed in Table 12.

14 Key stage 2 English reading test framework

Table 12: Profile of marks by question type
Selected or
constructed response
Selected
response
10–30%

Question types
Multiple choice

Example questions
Where would you be most likely
to see this text?
Tick one of the options below.

Ranking / ordering

Number the events below to show
the order in which they happen in
the story.

Matching

Match the text to the purpose.

Labelling

Label the text to show the title.

Short
constructed response
40–60%

Find and copy

Find and copy one word
that suggests…

Short response

What does the bear eat?

Extended
constructed response
20–40%

Open-ended response

Look at the paragraph beginning:
Once upon a time…
How does the writer increase the
tension throughout this paragraph?
Explain fully referring to the text in
your answer.

6.4 Marking and mark schemes
The tests will be externally marked on screen by trained markers.
The mark schemes will give specific guidance for the marking of each question, together
with general principles to ensure consistency of marking.
The mark schemes will provide the total number of marks available for each question and
the criteria by which markers should award the marks. Where multiple correct answers are
possible, examples of different types of correct answer will be given in the mark schemes.
Where applicable, additional guidance will indicate minimally acceptable responses and
unacceptable responses.
For all questions, the mark schemes will be developed during the test development
process and will combine the expectations of experts with examples of pupils’ responses
obtained during trialling.
For multi-mark questions, if the correct answer is not reached and, therefore, full marks
cannot be awarded, the mark scheme will provide details of how partial credit can
be awarded.

Key stage 2 English reading test framework 15

The mark schemes will contain the following information:

• the question
• a content domain reference
• the mark allocation
• square bullets indicating the required responses or acceptable points
• round bullets exemplifying pupils’ responses from the trials
• on 2 or 3 mark questions, the examples awarded higher marks will usually be
placed before the examples awarded lower marks
• open 2 and 3 mark questions should also consider the pupil’s ability to express
their reasoning through developed answers

6.5 Reporting
The raw score on the test (the total marks achieved out of the 50 marks available) will
be converted into a scaled score. Translating raw scores into scaled scores ensures
performance can be reported on a consistent scale for all pupils. Scaled scores retain the
same meaning from one year to the next. Therefore, a particular scaled score reflects the
same standard of attainment in one year as in the previous year, having been adjusted for
any differences in difficulty of the test.
Additionally, each pupil will receive an overall result indicating whether or not he or
she has achieved the required standard on the test. A standard-setting exercise will be
conducted on the first live test in 2016 in order to determine the scaled score needed for
a pupil to be considered to have met the standard. This process will be facilitated by the
performance descriptor in section 6.7, which defines the performance level required to
meet the standard. In subsequent years, the standard will be maintained using appropriate
statistical methods to translate raw scores on a new test into scaled scores with an
additional judgemental exercise at the expected standard. The scaled score required to
achieve the expected standard on the test will always remain the same.

6.6 Desired psychometric properties
While the focus of the outcome of the test will be whether a pupil has achieved the
expected standard, the test must measure pupils’ ability across the spectrum of attainment.
As a result, the test must aim to minimise the standard error of measurement at every point
on the reporting scale, particularly around the expected standard threshold.
The provision of a scaled score will aid in the interpretation of pupils’ performance over
time as the scaled score that represents the expected standard will be the same year-onyear. However, at the extremes of the scaled score distribution, as is standard practice,
the scores will be truncated such that above or below a certain point, all pupils are
awarded the same scaled score in order to minimise the effect for pupils at the ends of the
distribution, where the test is not measuring optimally.

16 Key stage 2 English reading test framework

6.7 Performance descriptor
This performance descriptor describes the typical characteristics of pupils whose
performance in the key stage 2 tests is at the threshold of the expected standard. Pupils
who achieve the expected standard in the tests have demonstrated sufficient knowledge
to be well-placed to succeed in the next phase of their education having studied the full
key stage 2 programme of study in English. This performance descriptor will be used by
teachers to set the standards on the new tests following their first administration in May
2016. It is not intended to be used to support teacher assessment, since it only reflects
the elements of the programme of study that can be assessed in a paper-based test (see
content domain in section 4).

6.7.1 Overview
Pupils working at the expected standard will be able to engage with all questions within
the test. However, they will not always achieve full marks on each question, particularly if
working at the threshold of the expected standard.
Questions will range from those requiring only simple retrieval in concrete tasks with
little or no inference to those requiring complex inferences in abstract tasks. There will
be a variety of question formats including selected response, short answer and extended
answer, which require fully structured, organised and accurately communicated responses.
Question difficulty will be affected by the strands of the cognitive domain such as the
accessibility and complexity of the target information within the reading text and the
complexity of the technical language or other vocabulary in the question. This should be
borne in mind when considering the remainder of this performance descriptor. Pupils
working at the threshold of the expected standard may not give correct responses to
questions where target information is not strongly located in the question or it has a
high level of abstractness and lexico-grammatical density, or where there is significant
competing information in the text that functions as a distractor. This will be true even
when the performance descriptor determines that a skill should be within the pupil’s
capacity if working at the expected standard.
The following sections describe the typical characteristics of pupils in Year 6 working at
the threshold of the expected standard. It is recognised that different pupils will exhibit
different strengths, so this is intended as a general guide rather than a prescriptive list.

Key stage 2 English reading test framework 17

Pupils working at the expected standard are able to:

• show an understanding of the meaning of vocabulary in context (2a)
• retrieve key details and quotations from fiction and non-fiction to demonstrate
understanding of character, events and information (2b)
• provide developed explanations for key information and events and for characters’
actions and motivations (2b)
• accurately and selectively summarise main ideas, events, characters and
information in fiction and non-fiction texts (2c)
• make developed inferences drawing on evidence from the text (2d)
• explain and justify inferences, providing evidence from the text to support
reasoning (2d)
• make developed predictions that are securely rooted in the text (2e)
• identify / explain how information in non-fiction is related and contributes to
meaning as a whole (2f )
• identify / explain how the sequence of events in narrative fiction contributes to
meaning as a whole (2f )
• identify / explain how the choice of language enhances the meaning of texts (2g)
• make accurate and appropriate comparisons within texts (2h)

18 Key stage 2 English reading test framework

7. Diversity and inclusion
The Equality Act 2010 sets out the principles by which the national curriculum assessment
and associated development activities are conducted. During the development of the
tests, STA’s test development division will make provision to overcome barriers to fair
assessment for individuals and groups wherever possible.
National curriculum tests will also meet Ofqual’s core regulatory criteria. One of the criteria
refers to the need for assessment procedures to minimise bias: ‘The assessment should
minimise bias, differentiating only on the basis of each learner’s ability to meet national
curriculum requirements’ (Regulatory framework for national assessment, published by
Ofqual 2011).
The end of key stage 2 English reading test should:

• use appropriate means to allow all pupils to demonstrate their skills in reading
• provide a suitable challenge for all pupils and give every pupil the opportunity to
achieve as high a standard as possible
• provide opportunities for all pupils to achieve, irrespective of gender, disability or
special educational need, social, linguistic or cultural backgrounds
• use materials that are familiar to pupils and for which they are adequately prepared
• not be detrimental to pupils’ self-esteem or confidence
• be free from stereotyping and discrimination in any form
The test development process uses the principles of universal design, as described in the
‘Guidance on the principles of language accessibility in national curriculum assessments’
(New language accessibility guidance, published by Ofqual 2012).
In order to improve general accessibility for all pupils, where possible, questions will be
placed in order of difficulty. As with all national curriculum tests, attempts have been made
to make the question rubric as accessible as possible for all pupils, including those who
experience reading and processing difficulties, and those for whom English is an additional
language, while maintaining an appropriate level of demand to adequately assess the
content. This includes applying the principles of plain English and universal design
wherever possible, conducting interviews with pupils, and taking into account feedback
from expert reviewers.
For each test in development, expert opinions on specific questions are gathered, for
example, at inclusion panel meetings, which are attended by experts and practitioners
from across the fields of disabilities and special educational needs. This provides an
opportunity for some questions to be amended or removed in response to concerns raised.
Issues likely to be encountered by pupils with specific learning difficulties have been
considered in detail. Where possible, features of questions that lead to construct irrelevant
variance (for example, question formats and presentational features) have been considered
and questions have been presented in line with best practice for dyslexia and other specific
learning difficulties.

Key stage 2 English reading test framework 19

7.1 Access arrangements
The full range of access arrangements applicable to key stage 2 assessments as set out in
the ARA will be available to eligible pupils as required.

7.2 Pupils with English as an additional language
(EAL)
Pupils with English as an additional language (EAL) should be registered for the national
curriculum tests. If a pupil’s limited ability to communicate in English means that he or she
is unable to access the test, then they will be working below the standard of the English
tests and should not take them, as set out in the ARA.

20 Key stage 2 English reading test framework

Appendix: Glossary of terminology used in
the test framework
cognitive domain

Cognitive processes refer to the thinking skills and intellectual
processes that occur in response to a stimulus. The cognitive domain
makes explicit the thinking skills associated with an assessment.
The cognitive domain, as shown in this framework, also identifies
other factors that may influence the difficulty of the questions.

component

A section of a test, presented to pupils as a test paper or test
booklet is called a component. Some tests may have two or more
components that each pupil needs to sit to complete the test.

construct irrelevant
variance

Construct irrelevant variance is the variation in pupils’ test scores
that does not come from their knowledge of the content domain. It
can result in pupils gaining fewer marks than their knowledge would
suggest or lead to the award of more marks than their knowledge
alone would deserve.
The former can occur, for example, when questions in a mathematics
test also unintentionally measure reading ability. The latter often
occurs when unintended clues within questions allow pupils to
answer correctly without having the required subject knowledge.

content domain

The body of subject knowledge to be assessed by the test

distribution

The range of possible scaled scores

domain

The codified definition of a body of skills and knowledge

mark scheme

The document explaining the creditworthy responses or the criteria
that must be applied to award the mark for a question in the test

national curriculum
programme of study

The national curriculum programme of study is the statutory
description of subject knowledge, skills and understanding for a
given key stage. The key stage 1 and 2 programmes of study are
published online at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculumin-england-primary-curriculum

performance
descriptor

A performance descriptor is a description of the typical
characteristics of pupils working at a particular standard. For these
tests, the performance descriptor will characterise the minimum
performance required to be working at the appropriate standard for
the end of the key stage.

Key stage 2 English reading test framework 21

raw score

A raw score is the unmodified score achieved on a test, following
marking. In the case of these tests it is the total marks achieved.
For example, if a pupil scores 27 out of 60 possible marks, the raw
score is 27. Raw scores are often then converted to other measures
such as percentile ranks, standardised scores or grades.

scaled score

A score which has been translated from a raw score into a score on a
fixed, defined scale is a scaled score. This allows performance to be
reported on a consistent scale for all pupils, which retains the same
meaning from one year to the next. Therefore, a particular scaled
score reflects the same level of attainment in one year as in the
previous year, having been adjusted for any differences in difficulty
of the specific tests.

standard

The required level of attainment in order to be classified into a
particular performance category

standard error of
measurement

The standard error of measurement is a reliability estimate that
allows the user to determine a confidence interval around a test
score. It is a measure of the distribution of scores that would be
attained by a pupil had that pupil taken the test repeatedly under
the same conditions.

standard setting

The process of applying the standard to a particular test to
determine the score required for a pupil to be classified within a
particular performance category

test framework

A document that sets out the principles, rationale and key
information about the test, and containing a test specification

test specification

A detailed description of what is to be included in a test in any single
cycle of development

truncate

To shorten by removing ends

References
Independent review of key stage 2 testing, assessment and accountability (2011), Lord Bew.
www.gov.uk/government/collections/key-stage-2-ks2-testing-review
Lumley, Tom; Routitsky, Alla; Mendelovits, Juliette; and Ramalingam, Dara, ‘The revised PISA reading
item difficulty scheme’, (2012). http://research.acer.edu.au/pisa/5

About this publication
Who is it for?
This document is primarily aimed at those responsible for developing the key stage 2
national curriculum test in English reading. It may also be of interest to schools with
pupils in key stage 2 and other education professionals.

What does it cover?
Detailed information to ensure an appropriate test is developed, including the:

• content domain
• cognitive domain
• test specification
• the test performance descriptor
Related information
Visit the GOV.UK website at www.gov.uk/sta for all related information.

For more copies
Printed copies of this document are not available. It can be downloaded from the
GOV.UK website at www.gov.uk/sta.

