National curriculum tests

Key stage 2
English grammar, punctuation
and spelling test framework
National curriculum tests from 2016
For test developers

© Crown copyright 2015
Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework:
national curriculum tests from 2016
Electronic version product code: STA/15/7340/e ISBN: 978-1-78315-825-6
You may re-use this document / publication (not including logos) free of charge
in any format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0.
To view this licence, visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
version/3 or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This document is available for download on the GOV.UK website at www.gov.uk/sta.

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 3

Contents
1. Overview
1.1 Purposes of statutory assessment

4
4

2. What is a test framework?

5

3. Nature of the test
3.1 Population to be assessed
3.2 Test format

6
6
6

4. Content domain
4.1 Paper 1: questions
4.2 Paper 2: spelling task
4.3 Elements of the national curriculum that cannot be assessed in this format
4.4 British English conventions
4.5 Further definitions and guidance

7
8
12
14
15
16

5. Cognitive domain
5.1 Cognitive level
5.2 Response strategy
5.3 Abstraction rating
5.4 Strategy support rating

18
19
20
21
22

6. Test specification
6.1 Summary
6.2 Breadth and emphasis
6.3 Format of questions and responses
6.4 Marking and mark schemes
6.5 Reporting
6.6 Desired psychometric properties
6.7 Performance descriptor

23
23
23
25
26
27
28
28

7. Diversity and inclusion
7.1 Access arrangements
7.2 Pupils with English as an additional language (EAL)
7.3 Compensatory marks

31
32
32
32

Appendix: Glossary of terminology used in the test framework

33

References

34

4 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

1. Overview
This test framework is based on the national curriculum programme of study (2014) for
English, introduced for teaching in schools from September 2014 and first assessed in the
summer term 2016. The framework specifies the purpose, format, content and cognitive
domains of the key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling tests; it is
not designed to be used to guide teaching and learning or to inform statutory
teacher assessment.
This document has been produced to aid the test development process.

1.1 Purposes of statutory assessment
The main purpose of statutory assessment is to ascertain what pupils have achieved in
relation to the areas of the national curriculum (2014) describing grammar, punctuation
and spelling.
The main intended uses of the outcomes as set out in the Bew Report and the
Government’s consultation document on primary assessment and accountability are to:

• hold schools accountable for the attainment and progress made by their pupils
• inform parents and secondary schools about the performance of individual pupils
• enable benchmarking between schools, as well as monitoring performance locally
and nationally.

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 5

2. What is a test framework?
The purpose of the test framework is to provide the documentation to guide the
development of the tests. The framework is written primarily for those who write test
materials and to guide subsequent development and test construction. It is being made
available to a wider audience for reasons of openness and transparency.
Some elements of the statutory national curriculum are not possible to assess using the
current form of testing; they will need to be assessed by teachers as part of their statutory
assessment of the complete national curriculum.
The framework includes those parts of the programme of study as outlined in the national
curriculum (2014) that will be covered in the test (the content domain). The cognitive
processes associated with the measurement of the construct of grammar, punctuation,
vocabulary and spelling are also detailed in the cognitive domain.
The test framework also includes a test specification from which valid, reliable and
comparable tests will be constructed each year. This includes specifics about test format,
question types, response types, marking and a clear test-level reporting strategy.
By providing all of this information in a single document, the test framework answers
questions about what the test will cover, and how, in a clear and concise manner. The
framework does not provide information on how teachers should teach the national
curriculum.
The test development process used by the Standards and Testing Agency (STA) embeds
within it the generation of validity and reliability evidence through expert review and
trialling. Given the nature of the evidence collected, it is not anticipated that any additional
studies will be required in order to demonstrate that the tests are fit for purpose. The test
framework does not provide detail of the validity and reliability of individual tests; this will
be provided in the test handbook, which will be published on the DfE’s website following
the administration of the test.
The test framework should be used in conjunction with the national curriculum (2014) and
the annual ‘Assessment and reporting arrangements’ (ARA) document.

6 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

3. Nature of the test
The key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test forms part of the statutory
assessment arrangements for pupils at the end of key stage 2.
The test contributes to the assessment of pupils in English and is based on the relevant
sections of the national curriculum statutory programme of study (2014) for English at key
stage 2, including those elements of content introduced at key stage 1 that are intended
to be consolidated during key stage 2. The programmes of study are set out for spoken
language, and reading and writing. There are two statutory appendices (Appendix 1:
Spelling and Appendix 2: Vocabulary, grammar and punctuation). Relevant content from
the programme of study and the appendices will be assessed in the English grammar,
punctuation and spelling test.
The test will cover the aspects of spelling, grammar, punctuation and vocabulary from
across the key stage 2 English national curriculum that lend themselves to paper-based,
externally marked testing. Writing composition will be subject to teacher assessment.

3.1 Population to be assessed
All eligible pupils who are registered at maintained schools, special schools or academies
(including free schools) in England and are at the end of key stage 2 will be required to take
the key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test, unless they have taken it in
the past.
Some pupils are exempt from the tests. Further details are in the ARA, which can be found
on the GOV.UK website at www.gov.uk/sta.

3.2 Test format
The key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test comprises two
components, which will be presented to pupils as two separate test papers. The test is
administered on paper. The spelling paper is administered aurally by a test administrator.
The total testing time is approximately 60 minutes as the spelling test is not strictly timed.
Table 1: Format of the test
Component

Description

Number
of papers

Number
of marks

Timing of
component

Paper 1: questions

grammar,
punctuation and
vocabulary

1

50

45 minutes

Paper 2: spelling

spelling (20 words)

1

20

15 minutes
(not strictly timed)

Total

2

70

60 minutes

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 7

4. Content domain
The content domain sets out the relevant elements from the national curriculum
programme of study (2014) for English at key stage 2 that are assessed in the English
grammar, punctuation and spelling test. The tests will, over time, sample from each area of
the content domain.
Although the majority of the test content is drawn from the statutory appendices, some
areas of content are sampled from across the programme of study for English.
The following tables detail content from the national curriculum (2014) that is assessed in
the English grammar, punctuation and spelling test. These are derived from the English
programmes of study for writing – vocabulary, grammar and punctuation, Appendix 1:
Spelling and Appendix 2: Vocabulary, grammar and punctuation. Elements from the
curriculum are grouped into content areas (eg 1 – Grammatical terms / word classes), each
of which is made up of subdomains (eg 1.1 – Nouns, 1.2 – Verbs). The elements are also
assigned to a numerical referencing system.
For the purposes of the English grammar, punctuation and spelling test, the areas covered
under ‘vocabulary’ are the parts of the content domain that relate to words and word-building.
This includes synonyms and antonyms, prefixes and suffixes, and word families.
Explanatory notes for Tables 2 and 3
The ‘Relevant coverage’ column is quoted directly from the national curriculum (2014) for
the English programme of study and statutory appendices.
indicates that the statutory appendix to the national curriculum (2014) requires the
terminology to be taught, as well as the application of the feature, which may appear
elsewhere in the programme of study. In order to assess the full curriculum, grammatical
terms that are used in the programme of study, but which are not required terminology,
may appear in the wording of items within the tests. However, children will not be
expected to generate this terminology in their responses.
T

indicates content introduced at key stage 1 that is intended to be consolidated
throughout key stage 2.

S

8 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

4.1 Paper 1: questions
Table 2: Content domain for Paper 1
Content domain
reference

Relevant coverage in the programme of study
and statutory appendices

G1: Grammatical terms / word classes
G1.1: NounsTS
G1.2: VerbsTS
G1.3: AdjectivesTS
G1.4: ConjunctionsT

expressing time, place and cause using conjunctions (e.g. when,
before, after, while, so, because)

G1.5: PronounsT

cohesionT
appropriate choice of pronoun or noun within and across
sentences to aid cohesion and avoid repetition

G1.5a: Possessive
pronounsT
G1.5b: Relative
pronounsT
G1.6: AdverbsTS

the use of –ly in Standard English to turn adjectives into
adverbsS
expressing time, place and cause using adverbs (e.g. then, next,
soon, therefore)
indicating degrees of possibility using adverbs (e.g. perhaps,
surely)

G1.6a: AdverbialsT
G1.7: PrepositionsT

expressing time, place and cause using prepositions (e.g. before,
after, during, in, because of)

G1.8: DeterminersT

use of the forms a or an according to whether the next word
begins with a consonant or a vowel

G1.9: Subject and objectT

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 9

Content domain
reference

Relevant coverage in the programme of study
and statutory appendices

G2: Functions of sentences
G2.1: StatementsTS

how the grammatical patterns in a sentence indicate its function
as a statement

G2.2: QuestionsTS

how the grammatical patterns in a sentence indicate its function
as a question, e.g. the use of question tags

G2.3: CommandsTS

how the grammatical patterns in a sentence indicate its function
as a command

G2.4: ExclamationsTS

how the grammatical patterns in a sentence indicate its function
as an exclamation (exclamations starting with what or how, e.g.
What a good friend you are!)

G3: Combining words, phrases and clauses
G3.1: SentencesTS and
clausesT

the boundary between independent (main) clauses

G3.1a: Relative clausesT

relative clauses beginning with who, which, where, when, whose,
that, or an omitted relative pronoun

G3.2: Noun phrasesTS

expanded noun phrases for description and specificationS
noun phrases expanded by the addition of modifying adjectives,
nouns and preposition phrases to convey complicated
information concisely

G3.3: Co-ordinating
conjunctionsS

co-ordination using or, and and but

G3.4: Subordinating
conjunctionsS and
subordinate clausesT

subordination using when, if, that and becauseS
extending the range of sentences with more than one clause by
using a wider range of conjunctions, including when, if, because,
although

G4: Verb forms, tense and consistency
G4.1a: Simple pastT and
simple presentTS

simple past tense and simple present tense

G4.1b: Verbs in the
perfect form

use of the present perfect form of verbs

G4.1c: Modal verbsT

indicating degrees of possibility using modal verbs

G4.1d: Present and past
progressives

use of the progressive form of verbs in the present and past
tense to mark actions in progress

using the perfect form of verbs to mark relationships of time and
cause

10 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

Content domain
reference
G4.2: Tense consistency

Relevant coverage in the programme of study
and statutory appendices
tense (past, present)T
correct choice and consistent use of present and past tense
throughout writing

G4.3: Subjunctive verb
forms

recognising subjunctive forms

G4.4: PassiveT and activeT

use of the passive to affect the presentation of information in a
sentence

G5: Punctuation
G5.1: Capital lettersTS

capital letters for names of people, places, the days of the week,
and the personal pronoun I
capital letters to demarcate sentences

G5.2: Full stopsTS

full stops to demarcate sentences

G5.3: Question marksTS

question marks to demarcate sentences

G5.4: Exclamation
marksTS

exclamation marks to demarcate sentences

G5.5: Commas in listsTS

commas to separate items in a list

G5.6a: CommasT to clarify
meaning

commas to clarify meaning or avoid ambiguityT in writing

G5.6b: CommasT after
fronted adverbials
G5.7: Inverted commas

direct speechT, inverted commasT (or ‘speech marks’)T
inverted commas and other punctuation to indicate direct
speech, (e.g. a comma after the reporting clause and end
punctuation within inverted commas)

G5.8: ApostrophesTS

apostrophes to mark singular possession in nounsS
apostrophes to mark plural possession
the grammatical difference between plural and possessive –s
apostrophes to mark contracted formsS

G5.9: Punctuation
for parenthesis

bracketsT, dashesT or commasT to indicate parenthesisT

G5.10: ColonsT

colon to mark the boundary between independent clauses
colon to introduce lists

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 11

Content domain
reference
G5.11: Semi-colonsT

Relevant coverage in the programme of study
and statutory appendices
semi-colon to mark the boundary between independent clauses
semi-colons within lists

G5.12: Single dashesT

dash to mark the boundary between independent clauses

G5.13: Hyphens

how hyphens can be used to avoid ambiguity

G5.14: Bullet pointsT

punctuation of bullet points to list information

G6: Vocabulary
G6.1: Synonyms and
antonymsT

how words are related by meaning as synonyms and antonyms

G6.2: PrefixesT

how the prefix un– changes the meaning of verbs and adjectivesS
formation of nouns using a range of prefixes (e.g. super–, anti–,
auto–)
verb prefixes (e.g. dis–, de–, mis–, over– and re–)

G6.3: SuffixesTS

the suffixes –ment, –ness, –ful , –less and –lyS
formation of nouns using suffixes such as –ness, –erST
formation of adjectives using suffixes such as –ful, –lessST
converting nouns or adjectives into verbs using suffixes (e.g.
–ate, –ise, –ify)
singularTS
pluralTS
regular plural noun suffixes –s or –es (e.g. dog, dogs; wish,
wishes), including the effects of these suffixes on the meaning of
the nouns

G6.4: Word familiesT

word families based on common words, showing how words are
related in form and meaning

G7: Standard English and formality
G7.1: Standard English

standard verb forms (e.g. I did / I done, We were / was, He was /
were, isn’t / ain’t)
pronouns (them / those, that / what, anything / nothing)
adverbs using –ly (run quickly / quick)

G7.2: Formal and
informal vocabulary

the difference between vocabulary typical of informal speech
and writing, and vocabulary appropriate for formal speech and
writing, e.g. ask for / request

12 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

Content domain
reference

Relevant coverage in the programme of study
and statutory appendices

G7.3: Formal and
informal structures

the difference between structures typical of informal speech
and writing, and structures appropriate for formal speech and
writing

G7.4: The subjunctive

recognise vocabulary and structures that are appropriate for
formal speech and writing, including subjunctive forms

4.2 Paper 2: spelling task
This paper consists of 20 target words, presented within 20 distinct, contextualised
sentences. The test administrator reads the words and sentences to pupils from a script.
The range of strategies and morphological awareness tested is drawn from the statutory
spelling appendix to the national curriculum programme of study (2014). The test may
include the example words and words drawn from the key stage 2 word lists provided as
appendices to the national curriculum (2014), but will not be limited to these and is likely
to draw on other words that assess the content described in Table 3. The appendix to the
national curriculum programme of study (2014) should be consulted for definitions of the
terms used.
There are three sections of the key stage 2 statutory spelling appendix that will be assessed
only in Paper 1:

• possessive apostrophe with plural words
• use of the hyphen
• contractions.
Table 3: Content domain for Paper 2
Content
domain
reference

Relevant coverage in the programme of study
and statutory appendices

S37

common exception words

S38

adding suffixes beginning with vowel letters to words of more than one
syllable

S39

the /i/ sound spelt y other than at the end of words

S40

the /ʌ/ sound spelt ou

S41

prefixes

S42

the suffix –ation

S43

the suffix –ly

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 13

Content
domain
reference

Relevant coverage in the programme of study
and statutory appendices

S44

words with endings sounding like /ʒə/ or /tʃə/

S45

endings that sound like /ʒən/

S46

the suffix –ous

S47

endings that sound like /ʃən/, spelt –tion, –sion, –ssion, –cian

S48

words with the /k/ sound spelt ch

S49

words with the /ʃ/ sound spelt ch

S50

words ending with the /g/ sound spelt –gue and the /k/ sound spelt –que

S51

words with the /s/ sound spelt sc

S52

words with the /eɪ/ sound spelt ei, eigh, or ey

S53

endings which sound like /ʃəs/ spelt –cious or –tious

S54

endings which sound like /ʃəl/

S55

words ending in –ant, –ance, –ancy, –ent, –ence, –ency

S56

words ending in –able and –ible
words ending in –ably and –ibly

S57

adding suffixes beginning with vowel letters to words ending in –fer

S58

words with the /i:/ sound spelt ei after c

S59

words containing the letter string ough

S60

words with ‘silent’ letters (i.e. letters whose presence cannot be
predicted from the pronunciation of the word)

S61

homophones and near homophones (Years 3 and 4)
homophones and other words that are often confused (Years 5 and 6)

14 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

4.3 Elements of the national curriculum that cannot
be assessed in this format
Table 4 below identifies areas that are difficult to assess fully in a paper-based format.
Some of the points below may be partially assessed.
Table 4: Elements of the curriculum that cannot be assessed
National curriculum reference

Explanation

English Appendix 2, Year 3, text:

These statements are better suited to being assessed
as part of teacher assessment of writing. They could be
partially assessed in a test in terms of asking pupils how
texts are organised (both in paragraphs and through
headings); it would not show how well the pupils use this
skill in their own writing, without a longer writing task.

introduction to paragraphs as a
way to group related material
headings and subheadings to aid
presentation
English Appendix 2, Year 4, text:
use of paragraphs to organise
ideas around a theme

English Appendix 2, Year 5, text:
devices to build cohesion within a
paragraph
linking ideas across paragraphs
using adverbials of time, place
and number or tense choices
English Appendix 2, Year 6, text:
linking ideas across paragraphs
using a wider range of cohesive
devices: repetition of a word or
phrase, grammatical connections,
e.g. the use of adverbials and
ellipses
layout devices

This statement is better suited to being assessed as part
of teacher assessment of writing. This could be partially
assessed in a test in terms of asking pupils how texts are
organised (both in paragraphs and through headings); it
would not show how well the pupils use this skill in their
own writing, without a longer writing task.
These statements are better suited to being assessed
as part of teacher assessment of writing. They could be
partially assessed in a test in terms of asking pupils what
devices are working to ensure cohesion; it would not
show how well the pupils use cohesive devices in their
own writing, without a longer writing task.

These statements are better suited to being assessed
as part of teacher assessment of writing. This could
be partially assessed in a test in terms of asking pupils
what devices were working to ensure cohesion; it would
not show how well the pupils use cohesive devices or
manipulate their own writing for effect, without a longer
writing task.

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 15

4.4 British English conventions
In spelling, punctuation and grammar, variations exist between British English and
conventions used in other English-speaking countries. The test will only credit pupils for using
British English conventions, which will relate in particular to the aspects detailed below.

4.4.1 Grammar and punctuation
Some irregular past tense forms are favoured in British English; in particular, the past
participle of ‘to get’ will be considered creditworthy in the test when formed as got rather
than gotten.
In keeping with the British English convention, both single inverted commas and double
quotation marks are considered creditworthy for punctuating speech, provided they are
used consistently within any single response.
For the purposes of the English grammar, punctuation and spelling test, a colon used within
a sentence should always be followed by a lower-case letter, unless the word is a proper
noun or the pronoun I.

4.4.2 Spelling
Where there is a difference between British English spellings and those found in other
varieties of English, it is the British English spelling that will be creditworthy. This applies to
words such as colour, catalogue or theatre, for which there are no alternative spellings in a
standard dictionary of British English, unless they are clearly marked as an American variant.
There are other words for which alternative spellings are acceptable within British English
(e.g. organise / organize). These are shown as equal alternatives in a standard dictionary of
British English, and are not marked as a variant from any other country. Either spelling of
such words is considered creditworthy in the test.

4.4.3 Vocabulary
In order to be creditworthy, vocabulary used in pupils’ responses must appear in a standard
dictionary of British English. Where there is any difference in meaning between the
dictionary definition and that used in other varieties of English or in slang, the dictionary
definition will be favoured.

16 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

4.5 Further definitions and guidance
4.5.1 Sentences with different forms: questions
For the purposes of the English grammar, punctuation and spelling test, a question is
required to include one of the following syntactical forms:

• an initial interrogative pronoun (e.g. Which is your favourite?)
• subject–verb inversion (e.g. Is this your favourite? Do you like this one?)
• a correctly punctuated question tag (e.g. This is your favourite, isn’t it?).
A sentence that has the syntax of a statement, but to which a question mark has been
added, is not considered to be a creditworthy question form (e.g. This is your favourite?),
although it is recognised that they may be used in spoken language.

4.5.2 Sentences with different forms: exclamations
An exclamation is a sentence that has a particular syntax. Exclamations begin with What or
How and are usually demarcated by an exclamation mark, eg:

• What a lovely day it is!
• How exciting this term has been!
A sentence that ends in an exclamation mark, but which does not have one of the
grammatical patterns shown above, is not considered to be creditworthy as an exclamation
(e.g. exclamatory statements, exclamatory imperatives, exclamatory interrogatives or
interjections).
An exclamation mark is a punctuation mark that can end a statement, command
or exclamation, or be placed after a phrase or single word (e.g. an interjection). An
exclamation mark shows that the writer wants to indicate a certain effect, such as
heightened emotion e.g. ‘Be my friend!’ [command] and will be considered creditworthy.

4.5.3 Spelling of responses within Paper 1
Correct spelling is required for the award of the mark for the majority of questions in
Paper 1, especially in the following cases:

• verb forms – the whole word must be correctly spelt for the award of the mark
• contractions – the full contraction must be correctly spelt and the apostrophe
correctly placed for the award of the mark
• prefixes and suffixes – the whole word (i.e. the root and the prefix and / or suffix)
must be correctly spelt for the award of the mark
• plurals – the whole word must be correctly spelt in responses to questions
assessing plurals for the award of the mark. The use of an apostrophe in the
formation of a plural will prohibit the award of the mark, unless this is a legitimate
use to indicate a possessive plural.

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 17

4.5.4 Punctuation of direct speech
As is consistent with the statutory appendix to the national curriculum, the punctuation of
direct speech will only be deemed creditworthy if:

• closing punctuation is placed inside the final inverted commas
• a comma is used after a fronted reporting clause (if applicable).
4.5.5 The use of the serial comma
The mark will not be awarded if a serial comma is used in a list of single items, e.g.
We bought apples, cheese, and milk.
However, the serial comma is acceptable if it used for the avoidance of ambiguity, e.g.
My favourite sandwiches are ham, beef and mustard, and tuna.

4.5.6 Accuracy in copied sentences in Paper 1
Where pupils are required to copy (or ‘rewrite’) a given sentence, the meaning and key
words of the sentence must be preserved. Minor copying errors, such as a change of
article, are tolerated. Misspellings are not penalised unless in plurals, contractions, or words
requiring a prefix and / or suffix, where this is the assessment focus of the question.

4.5.7 Capital letters
Where they are required, capital letters must be clear and unambiguous for the award of
the mark. Where letters do not have unique capital letter forms, this means that the height
of the capital letter will be similar to the height of letters with ascenders and will be clearly
greater than the height of letters that do not have ascenders. For example, in the word
‘What’, the height of the capital letter ‘W’ should be a similar height to, or taller than, the ‘h’.
Where pupils need to write, rewrite or complete a sentence, capital letters within a
sentence will be marked as incorrect, unless used to start a proper noun or the pronoun ‘I’.
This includes where an entire word is capitalised, for example, for emphasis. Incorrect use
of capital letters negates an otherwise correct response and will be marked as incorrect.
Where pupils are asked to write a short response that is not part of a sentence (for
example, if they are asked to write a word or phrase in a box or table), the use of capital
letters will not be taken into account when deciding whether the mark should be awarded.
The only exception to this is if the word is a proper noun; in this case, a capital letter will be
required for the award of the mark.

18 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

5. Cognitive domain
The cognitive domain seeks to make the thinking skills and intellectual processes required
for the key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test explicit. Each question
will be rated against the four strands of the cognitive domain listed in Table 5 below to
provide an indication of the cognitive demand.
The cognitive domain will be used during test development to ensure comparability of
demand as well as difficulty for tests in successive years.
Table 5: Cognitive classifications
Classification

Description

Ratings scale

Cognitive level

a three-point scale indicating the degree of
cognitive complexity associated with the operation
required by the question

1 (low) – 3 (high)

Response
strategy

a four-point scale, subcategorising the selected
and constructed question formats used for the test
according to their respective levels of demand

1 (low) – 4 (high)

Abstraction
rating

a three-point scale, indicating the familiarity of
the question’s vocabulary and context for the test
population

1 (low) – 3 (high)

Strategy
support rating

a three-point scale, indicating the level of support
offered within the question and the extent to which
pupils need to organise and strategise their own
responses

1 (low) – 3 (high)

A detailed explanation of each of the four dimensions follows in sections 5.1–5.4.

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 19

The square brackets [ ] in the following tables are used to identify examples of content in
questions. These could be substituted for a range of features.

5.1 Cognitive level
The cognitive level is classified within a three-point taxonomy.
Table 6: Cognitive level
Question
dimension
Explanation

Knowledge and
comprehension
(low)
remembers learned
information and
demonstrates an
understanding of the
facts

Application and
analysis
applies knowledge to
given linguistic contexts
categorises and analyses
examples of language

identifies linguistic
features and
understands their use
Example
question
stems

What is the name of
the punctuation mark
below?

Complete the sentence
below with an [adverb]
that makes sense.

Circle two [verbs] in this
sentence.

Categorise these [types
of pronoun].
Rewrite the sentence
below [using Standard
English].

Synthesis and
evaluation
(high)
compiles component
ideas or proposes
alternative solutions
makes comparisons and
judgements about the
uses of language and
punctuation
What would be the
effect of replacing this
[full stop] with a [semicolon]?

20 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

5.2 Response strategy
The response strategy is considered within a scale that ranges from closed to extended
response formats, subcategorised into a number of types.
Table 7: Response strategy
Constructed
response: data
transformation

Constructed
response:
prompted

Constructed
response:
independent

selecting the
correct response
or identifying
a feature from
a given field of
data

transforming
a given word,
phrase or
sentence

inserting a
word or phrase
within a given
target sentence,
following a
specific prompt

open response,
without a
prompt or frame
within which to
write

Tick to show
[which sentence
is correctly
punctuated].

Rewrite the
sentence below,
changing it to
[past] tense.

Add an
[adjective] to
complete the
sentence.

Write a
statement [to
answer the
question below].

Circle all the
[nouns] in the
sentence below.

Replace the
underlined
words with a
[contraction].

Response
format

Selected
response

Explanation

Example
item stems

Explain why a
[pair of brackets]
is needed in the
sentence below.

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 21

5.3 Abstraction rating
The abstraction rating is an indicator of the familiarity of the question for the test
population. It takes into account the concreteness or abstractness of the concepts involved
and the likely familiarity of the vocabulary and context for the test population.
Table 8: Abstraction rating
Abstraction
rating

1

2

3

Description

The vocabulary and
context can reasonably
be assumed to be
highly familiar to the
majority of pupils
taking the test.

The vocabulary and
context may fall
outside the pupil’s
immediate personal
experience, but are
nonetheless familiar
through coverage in
the primary national
curriculum, pupils’
literature or the media.

The vocabulary and
context will be the
least familiar and are
likely to be outside the
direct experience of
those sitting the tests.

Examples of
contexts or
vocabulary

school-based situations

topics covered in
other primary national
curriculum subjects,
e.g. science and nature,
significant periods of
history

low frequency
spellings / vocabulary

domestic and family
scenarios
food, animals, items of
clothing
colours
public transport
hobbies, e.g. swimming

visits, e.g. school
trips, parks, libraries,
transport, beaches

appropriate adult
scenarios, e.g.
workplaces that pupils
rarely encounter

22 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

5.4 Strategy support rating
The strategy support rating indicates the extent to which the pupil must arrive
independently at an understanding of the question requirements, response method and
answer format.
Table 9: Strategy support rating
Strategy
support rating
Description

1

2

3

indicates questions
that provide a high
level of support, such
as by providing an
exemplar response
[that shows the
method]

indicates questions
that provide some
level of support, such
as a target sentence
that contextualises the
pupil’s response

indicates questions
that do not include
any support, and in
which the pupil is
therefore required
to interpret the
vocabulary, method
and expected answer
format independently

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 23

6. Test specification
This section provides details of each test component.

6.1 Summary
The test comprises two components, which will be presented to pupils as two
separate papers.
Table 10: Format of the test
Component

Description

Number
of papers

Number
of marks

Timing of
component

Paper 1: questions

grammar,
punctuation and
vocabulary

1

50

45 minutes

Paper 2: spelling

spelling (20 words)

1

20

15 minutes
(not strictly timed)

Total

2

70

60 minutes

6.2 Breadth and emphasis
The content and cognitive domains for the English grammar, punctuation and spelling
test are specified in sections 4 and 5. The test will sample from the content domain in any
given year. Although every element may not be included within each test, the full range
of content detailed in this document will be assessed over time. Consolidation of the key
stage 1 material is assumed within the key stage 2 programme of study and therefore
material from key stage 1 may appear within the key stage 2 test. The questions in each
test will be placed in an approximate order of difficulty.
The following sections show the proportion of marks attributed to each of the areas of the
content and cognitive domains in a test.

6.2.1 Profile of content domain
Table 11 shows the proportion of marks allocated to each element of the content domain.
This allocation will allow coverage of the relevant areas of the national curriculum (2014)
over time. The content domain is subdivided into four elements: grammar, punctuation,
vocabulary and spelling.

24 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

Table 11: Profile of marks by content area
Paper
Paper 1: questions

Paper 2: spelling

Content domain
reference

Number
of marks

Percentage
of total mark

grammar

25–35

36–50%

punctuation

10–20

14–29%

vocabulary

3–7

4–10%

spelling

20

29%

Total

70

6.2.2 Profile of cognitive domain
The cognitive domain for the test is specified in section 5. Questions in Paper 1 of the test
are rated in terms of demand against each of the four strands of the cognitive domain.
The content domain may be tested through questions across any combination of the four
cognitive dimensions.
In Paper 1, any element of the content domain may be tested through any of the levels of
cognitive demand. However, the majority of questions will be drawn from the ‘knowledge
and comprehension’ or ‘application and analysis’ levels.
Any element of the content domain may be assessed through any of the subtypes of
response strategy given in section 5.2. The majority of questions in any test will be
selected response.
Questions from across the content range may provide pupils with strategy support at
levels 1, 2, or 3 as defined in the table in section 5.4.
Question contexts will draw from abstraction levels 1 and 2 only.
In Paper 2, the majority of sentence contexts will also be drawn from abstraction levels 1
and 2. However, where low-frequency vocabulary is selected in order to test a particular
spelling pattern, it may be necessary to introduce a surrounding context sentence that
is less familiar to the test population; these infrequent examples will have an abstraction
rating of ‘3’ (eg phenomenon).

6.2.3 Question selection and organisation
Questions in Paper 1 are, as far as possible, placed in order of difficulty. The difficulty of
individual questions is determined quantitatively from trialling data.
The words for the spelling task are selected from a large bank of pre-tested content. The
words are selected to take account of pupils’ developing ability to spell a wide range of
words accurately and to apply the strategies specified in the content domain. The words
are presented in order of spelling difficulty.

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 25

Pre-testing is used to determine how each spelling word functions statistically. Words
included in the task are selected to ensure an appropriate range of difficulty so that
pupils at the end of key stage 2 are able to demonstrate performance and standards are
maintained.

6.3 Format of questions and responses
6.3.1 Paper 1: questions
The questions in Paper 1 of the test are categorised into two broad formats:

• selected response – requiring selection of the correct answer
• constructed response – requiring the pupil to write a short answer of their own
within a specified format.

The proportion of each format that will appear in any single test is given in Table 12.
Table 12: Profile of marks by response strategy
Range
of marks

Percentage of
Paper 1 marks

Selected response

33–42

66–84%

Constructed response

8–17

16–34%

Question type

These formats are further categorised into the following subtypes:
Table 13: Question subtype
Question type
Selected response

Rubric subtype
‘Identify…’
‘Match…’

Constructed response

‘Complete / correct / rewrite…’
‘Write…’
‘Explain…’

In Paper 1, most responses will require only a tick, circle, line or very short written response.
Some test questions do require a full sentence to be written. As the questions become
harder throughout the test, these questions are more likely to appear toward the end of the
paper. This allows pupils every opportunity to gain more straightforward marks easily.
The stems in Table 14 are indicative of the rubric used in live test questions for each
subtype, although actual questions may differ from, and are not limited to, the examples
given. The question types below can be asked using selected or constructed response types.

26 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

Table 14: Question stems in Paper 1
Question stem type
Identify

Definition

Common examples

These questions test pupils’
knowledge of particular
terminology, language or
punctuation features by requiring
them to identify the correct
response from a given selection. In
most cases, they will have to tick,
underline or circle the response.

Tick one word to complete the
sentence below.

Match

These questions require the
pairing of two different elements
printed on the page, so that the
pupils indicate their response by
drawing a line, and do not need to
write.

Draw lines to match each sentence
to [its type].

Complete / correct /
rewrite

These questions usually require
pupils to insert or generate a
specified type of response within a
given structure, either to complete
the target sentence or to correct
an error within it.

Rewrite the sentence below,
changing it to [past tense].

Write

These questions require pupils
to generate their own examples
of specified language, or to label
given language with a technical
term.

Write a statement [to answer the
question below].

Explain

These questions require pupils
to express their understanding
of particular terminology and
language features by requiring
them to analyse and explain, in
their own words, how or why that
element is used.

The sentence below has [an
apostrophe] missing. Explain why
it needs [the apostrophe].

Circle all the [nouns] in the
sentence below.
Which sentence [is punctuated]
correctly?

Copy the sentence below. Add
[commas] where necessary.

Why is the [colon] used in the
sentence below?

6.3.2 Paper 2: spelling
Paper 2 consists of 20 target words. Spellings will be presented within 20 distinct,
contextualised sentences. The teacher / test administrator will read the words and
sentences to pupils from a script.

6.4 Marking and mark schemes
The tests will be externally marked on screen by trained markers.
The mark schemes will give specific guidance for the marking of each question, together
with general principles to ensure consistency of marking.

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 27

The mark schemes will provide the total number of marks available for each question and
the criteria by which markers should award the marks. Where multiple correct answers are
possible, examples of different types of correct answer will be given in the mark schemes.
Where applicable, additional guidance will indicate minimally acceptable responses and
unacceptable responses.
For all questions, the mark schemes will be developed during the test development
process and will combine the expectations of experts with examples of pupils’ responses
obtained during trialling.
For multi-mark questions, if the correct answer is not reached and, therefore, full marks
cannot be awarded, the mark scheme will provide details of how partial credit can
be awarded.
The mark schemes will contain the following information:

• a content domain reference
• the mark allocation
• square bullets indicating the required responses or acceptable points
• round bullets exemplifying pupils’ responses from the trials
• for multi-mark questions, the examples awarded higher marks will usually be
placed before the examples awarded lower marks.

6.5 Reporting
The raw score on the test (the total marks achieved out of the 70 marks available) will
be converted into a scaled score. Translating raw scores into scaled scores ensures
performance can be reported on a consistent scale for all pupils. Scaled scores retain the
same meaning from one year to the next. Therefore, a particular scaled score reflects the
same standard of attainment in one year as in the previous year, having been adjusted for
any differences in difficulty of the test.
Additionally, each pupil will receive an overall result indicating whether or not he or
she has achieved the required standard on the test. A standard-setting exercise will be
conducted on the first live test in 2016 in order to determine the scaled score needed for
a pupil to be considered to have met the standard. This process will be facilitated by the
performance descriptor in section 6.7, which defines the performance level required to
meet the standard. In subsequent years, the standard will be maintained using appropriate
statistical methods to translate raw scores on a new test into scaled scores with an
additional judgemental exercise at the expected standard. The scaled score required to
achieve the expected standard on the test will always remain the same.

28 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

6.6 Desired psychometric properties
While the focus of the outcome of the test will be whether a pupil has achieved the
expected standard, the test must measure pupils’ ability across the spectrum of attainment.
As a result, the test must aim to minimise the standard error of measurement at every point
on the reporting scale, particularly around the expected standard threshold.
The provision of a scaled score will aid in the interpretation of pupils’ performance over
time as the scaled score that represents the expected standard will be the same year-onyear. However, at the extremes of the scaled score distribution, as is standard practice,
the scores will be truncated such that above or below a certain point, all pupils will be
awarded the same scaled score in order to minimise the effect for pupils at the ends of the
distribution, where the test is not measuring optimally.

6.7 Performance descriptor
This performance descriptor describes the typical characteristics of pupils whose
performance in the key stage 2 tests is at the threshold of the expected standard. Pupils
who achieve the expected standard in the tests have demonstrated sufficient knowledge
to be well-placed to succeed in the next phase of their education, having studied the full
key stage 2 programme of study in English. This performance descriptor will be used by
teachers to set the standards on the new tests following their first administration in May
2016. It is not intended to be used to support teacher assessment, since it only reflects
the elements of the programme of study that can be assessed in a paper-based test (see
content domain in section 4).

6.7.1 Overview
Pupils working at the expected standard will be able to engage with all questions within
the test. However, they will not always achieve full marks on each question, particularly if
working at the threshold of the expected standard.
Questions will range from those requiring recall of facts to those requiring synthesis and
evaluation. There will be a variety of question formats including selected response, short
answer and constructed response where no strategy is provided within the question.
Question difficulty will be affected by the strands of the cognitive domain such as how
abstract the task is and the extent to which support is given in the question to help pupils
organise their response. This should be borne in mind when considering the remainder
of this performance descriptor, since pupils working at the threshold of the expected
standard may not give correct responses to all questions. This will be true even when the
performance descriptor determines that a skill should be within a pupil‘s capacity if working
at the expected standard.
The following sections describe the typical characteristics of pupils in Year 6 working at
the threshold of the expected standard. It is recognised that different pupils will exhibit
different strengths, so this is intended as a general guide rather than a prescriptive list.

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 29

6.7.2 Grammar and vocabulary
Pupils working at the expected standard are able to:

• demonstrate familiarity with a range of word classes, their terminology and their
use: nouns, verbs, adjectives, conjunctions, pronouns, adverbs, prepositions and
determiners

• recognise and write different types of sentence: statements, questions, commands
and exclamations
• demonstrate familiarity with terms relating to a sentence, including subject and
object
• distinguish between co-ordinating and subordinating conjunctions and use them
to link clauses appropriately
• identify and use main clauses and subordinate clauses (including relative clauses)
in a sentence
• identify and use expanded noun phrases for description and concision
• identify and use fronted adverbial phrases to denote time and place (e.g. Later that
day, I met Tina.)
• select pronouns appropriately for clarity and cohesion (e.g. The pupils will be
visiting the activity centre. They will try all the activities it has to offer.)
• distinguish between formal and informal language and structures and standard
and non-standard forms of English
• use Standard English when appropriate
• select and use regular and irregular verb forms that express present and past time,
including the progressive and perfect forms (e.g. We are hoping to win. I had swum
across the lake.)

• choose tenses accurately and mostly consistently
• ensure correct subject–verb agreement
• identify and use the active and passive verb forms
• identify modal verbs to express future time and degrees of possibility (e.g. I might
go to the park. They should be home soon.)
• identify, form and expand contractions accurately
• select appropriate synonyms and antonyms for a wide range of words
• use prefixes and suffixes to change the meaning of words, for example, to change
words into different word classes
• recognise and use words from the same word families.

30 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

6.7.3 Punctuation
Pupils working at the expected standard are able to:

• demarcate sentences accurately, using capital letters and full stops, question marks
or exclamation marks as appropriate
• use commas to mark clauses or phrases, including fronted adverbials (e.g. The
cottage, which had a blue door, looked warm and cosy. Despite these facts, people
choose to eat unhealthy food.), usually consistently

• use inverted commas to denote speech and place these correctly in relation to
internal punctuation
• use apostrophes correctly for omission and singular possession, and mostly
accurately for plural possession
• identify and use punctuation to indicate parenthesis
• identify and use, with some consistency, colons, semi-colons, single dashes
and hyphens.

6.7.4 Spelling
Pupils working at the expected standard are able to spell both monosyllabic and
polysyllabic words accurately, including common exception words, common homophones
and near-homophones.

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 31

7. Diversity and inclusion
The Equality Act 2010 sets out the principles by which national curriculum assessments
and associated development activities are conducted. During the development of the
tests, STA’s test development division will make provision to overcome barriers to fair
assessment for individuals and groups wherever possible.
National curriculum tests will also meet Ofqual’s core regulatory criteria. One of the criteria
refers to the need for assessment procedures to minimise bias: ‘The assessment should
minimise bias, differentiating only on the basis of each learner’s ability to meet national
curriculum requirements’ (Regulatory framework for national assessment, published by
Ofqual 2011).
The end of key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test should:

• use appropriate means to allow all pupils to demonstrate their skills in grammar,
punctuation, vocabulary and spelling
• provide a suitable challenge for all pupils and give every pupil the opportunity to
achieve as high a standard as possible
• provide opportunities for all pupils to achieve, irrespective of gender, disability or
special educational need, social, linguistic or cultural backgrounds
• use materials that are familiar to pupils and for which they are adequately prepared
• not be detrimental to pupils’ self-esteem or confidence
• be free from stereotyping and discrimination in any form.

The test development process uses the principles of universal design, as described in the
‘Guidance on the principles of language accessibility in national curriculum assessments’
(New language accessibility guidance, published by Ofqual 2012).
In order to improve general accessibility for all pupils, where possible, questions will be
placed in order of difficulty. As with all national curriculum tests, attempts have been made
to make the question rubric as accessible as possible for all pupils, including those who
experience reading and processing difficulties, and those for whom English is an additional
language, while maintaining an appropriate level of demand to adequately assess the
content. This includes applying the principles of plain English and universal design
wherever possible, conducting interviews with pupils, and taking into account feedback
from expert reviewers.
For each test in development, expert opinions on specific questions are gathered, for
example, at inclusion panel meetings, which are attended by experts and practitioners
from across the fields of disabilities and special educational needs. This provides an
opportunity for some questions to be amended or removed in response to concerns raised.
Issues likely to be encountered by pupils with specific learning difficulties have been
considered in detail. Where possible, features of questions that lead to construct irrelevant
variance (for example, question formats and presentational features) have been considered
and questions have been presented in line with best practice for dyslexia and other specific
learning difficulties.

32 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

7.1 Access arrangements
The full range of access arrangements applicable to key stage 2 assessments as set out in
the ARA will be available to eligible pupils as required.

7.2 Pupils with English as an additional language
(EAL)
Pupils with English as an additional language should be registered for the national
curriculum tests. If a pupil’s limited ability to communicate in English means that he or she
is unable to access the test, then they will be working below the level of the English tests
and should not take them, as set out in the ARA.

7.3 Compensatory marks
Compensatory marks for spelling will be available for eligible pupils. Consistent with the
ARA, these will be based on the mean average scores that pupils achieved during live
administration.

Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework 33

Appendix: Glossary of terminology used in
the test framework
cognitive domain

Cognitive processes refer to the thinking skills and intellectual
processes that occur in response to a stimulus. The cognitive domain
makes explicit the thinking skills associated with an assessment.
The cognitive domain, as shown in this framework, also identifies
other factors that may influence the difficulty of the questions.

component

A section of a test, presented to pupils as a test paper or test
booklet is called a component. Some tests may have two or more
components that each pupil needs to sit to complete the test.
The English grammar, punctuation and spelling test comprises two
components.

construct irrelevant
variance

Construct irrelevant variance is the variation in pupils’ test scores
that does not come from their knowledge of the content domain. It
can result in pupils gaining fewer marks than their knowledge would
suggest or lead to the award of more marks than their knowledge
alone would deserve.
The former can occur, for example, when questions in a mathematics
test also unintentionally measure reading ability. The latter often
occurs when unintended clues within questions allow pupils to
answer correctly without having the required subject knowledge.

content domain

The body of subject knowledge to be assessed by the test

distribution

The range of possible scaled scores

domain

The codified definition of a body of skills and knowledge

mark scheme

The document explaining the creditworthy responses or the criteria
that must be applied to award the mark for a question in the test

national curriculum
programme of study

The national curriculum programme of study is the statutory
description of subject knowledge, skills and understanding for a
given key stage. The key stage 1 and 2 programmes of study are
published online at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculumin-england-primary-curriculum

performance
descriptor

A performance descriptor is a description of the typical
characteristics of pupils working at a particular standard. For these
tests, the performance descriptor will characterise the minimum
performance required to be working at the appropriate standard for
the end of the key stage.

34 Key stage 2 English grammar, punctuation and spelling test framework

raw score

A raw score is the unmodified score achieved on a test, following
marking. In the case of these tests it is the total marks achieved.
For example, if a pupil scores 27 out of 60 possible marks, the raw
score is 27. Raw scores are often then converted to other measures
such as percentile ranks, standardised scores or grades.

scaled score

A score which has been translated from a raw score into a score on a
fixed, defined scale is a scaled score. This allows performance to be
reported on a consistent scale for all pupils, which retains the same
meaning from one year to the next. Therefore, a particular scaled
score reflects the same level of attainment in one year as in the
previous year, having been adjusted for any differences in difficulty
of the specific tests.

standard

The required level of attainment in order to be classified into a
particular performance category

standard error of
measurement

The standard error of measurement is a reliability estimate that
allows the user to determine a confidence interval around a test
score. It is a measure of the distribution of scores that would be
attained by a pupil had that pupil taken the test repeatedly under
the same conditions.

standard setting

The process of applying the standard to a particular test to
determine the score required for a pupil to be classified within a
particular performance category

test framework

A document that sets out the principles, rationale and key
information about the test, and containing a test specification

test specification

A detailed description of what is to be included in a test in any single
cycle of development

truncate

To shorten by removing ends

References
Independent review of key stage 2 testing, assessment and accountability (2011), Lord Bew.

www.gov.uk/government/collections/key-stage-2-ks2-testing-review

About this publication
Who is it for?
This document is aimed primarily at those responsible for developing the key stage 2
national curriculum test in English grammar, punctuation and spelling. It may also be
of interest to schools with pupils in key stage 2 and other education professionals.

What does it cover?
The test framework provides detailed information to ensure an appropriate test is
developed, including the:

• content domain
• cognitive domain
• test specification
• test performance descriptor.
Related information
Visit the GOV.UK website at www.gov.uk/sta for all related information.

For more copies
Printed copies of this document are not available. It can be downloaded from the
GOV.UK website at www.gov.uk/sta.

